# Métodos Analíticos para el procesamiento de datos Geoespaciales - Geostatistical Maping

Clase del 2023-10-03.

> If God had meant for us to be in the Army, we would have been born with
> green, baggy skin.

## Temas

- Any measurement has a spatio-temporal reference, four parameters:
  1. Geographic location
  2. Height above the ground surface
  3. Tie of measurement
  4. Spatio-temporal support (size of the blocks of material associated with measurements; time interval of measurement).
     - Evento sísmico, inundaciones, etc.

Objectives of geostatistics

1. Model estimation: inference about the model parameters.
2. Prediction: inference about the unobserved values of the target variable.
3. Hypothesis Testing: in this case we typically look for the most reliable statistical technique that provides both a good estimate of the model.

Spatial prediction

- Spatial prediction, so that sometimes for pragmatic reasons naive approaches are more frequently used to generate outputs; uncertainity associated with spatial predictions is often ignored or overlooked.
- We are more interested in generating maps; exploring spatio-temporal patterns in data.

## Glosario

Geoestadística
: Rama de la estadística con propiedades espaciales.

Variograma
: El cambio a través del tiempo de un dato geoespacial.
: Representación gráfica de datos geoespaciales.

STDA
: Spatio-temporal data analysis

Geomorphometry
: Características del suelo para poderlo analizar.

---

Humberto Alejandro Ortega Alcocer - 2023-10-03
